README.md, before:

# rails-dtrace

The rails-dtrace gem hooks into the ActiveSupport::Notifications
instruments in Rails, turning them into DTrace probes.

## Requirements

Rails > 3.0

An OS that supports DTrace. For example:
* MacOS X
* Illumos
* SmartOS
* Solaris
* BSD
* Oracle Linux ?

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'ruby-usdt', :git => 'https://github.com/chrisa/ruby-usdt.git',
        :submodules => true, :branch => 'disable_provider'
gem 'rails-dtrace'
```

And then execute:

```bash
$ bundle
```

## Warning

This gem in an experiment in progress. The code does not have automated
tests, and the performance impact of ActiveSupport::Notifications
combined with ruby-usdt and libusdt are unknown. **DO NOT USE THIS IN
PRODUCTION** unless you love risk.

Also, this gem requires experimental behavior in libusdt/ruby-usdt.
Core behavior may drastically change between releases/commits of this
gem. When this is no longer the case (and I figure out how to write
tests around this gem) these warnings will disappear.

## Usage

Once you add the gem to your Rails application, it will automatically
subscribe to all notifications, turning them into DTrace probes. 

Note that notifications are lazy-loaded, so even though rails-dtrace subscribes to all available instruments, they will only be converted to probes as they fire in Rails code. For this reason, in order to get a full picture of what is happening in a Rails process, enough load should be generated to ensure that all important probes are registered before tracing.

### Rails 3

Arguments to probes are:

* `arg0` - Unique identifier of notification - String
* `arg1` - Stringified hash of notification payload - String
* `arg2` - Nanoseconds between start and finish of event - Integer

The notification name is turned into the probe function, and the probe name is defined as 'event'. For instance, `sql.active_record` becomes `ruby*:rails:sql.active_record:event`. This is to make events somewhat compatible with the edge Rails method of firing events, described below.

Some operating systems (MacOS X, I'm looking at you) don't give you nanosecond time resolution. In this case you get microseconds multipled by 1000.

The following dtrace command can be used, as an example:

```bash
sudo dtrace -n 'ruby*:rails:sql.active_record: { 
  printf(
    "%s \n\t %s \n\t %d", 
    copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg1),
    arg2
  )
}'
```

Example output:

```
  1  15407  sql.active_record:event 4595e4d30b17bdb96fe9 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70184895988280, :binds=>[]} 
	 238000
```


### Rails 4 / Edge Rails

In newer Rails, notifications become more dtrace-like. Rather than a notification sending a message to `#call` (which gets start time and end time), they can send two messages, `#start` and `#finish`. This way, you can do your own math on the notification timing.

In *rails-dtrace*, the notification name becomes the probe function, and we map `start -> entry` and `finish -> exit`.

If a notification subscriber responds to #call, ActiveSupport::Notifications will send methods in the Rails 3 way. For this reason the rails-dtrace code is incompatible at this time. It could conceivably be done with some metaprogramming to trick the Rails framework, but I'd prefer to keep the rails-dtrace code small and readable.

Arguments to probes are:

* `arg0` - Unique identifier of notification - String
* `arg1` - Stringified hash of notification payload - String
* `arg2` - 0 - This is for seamless compatibility with older Rails - Integer

The following dtrace command can be used, as an example:

```bash
sudo dtrace -n 'ruby*:rails:sql.active_record: { 
  printf(
    "%s \n\t %s", 
    copyinstr(arg0),
    copyinstr(arg1)
  )
}'
```

Example output:

```
3  52609  sql.active_record:entry a392841cfd75a132432e 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70362294355260, :binds=>[]}
3  52610  sql.active_record:exit a392841cfd75a132432e 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70362294355260, :binds=>[]}
```


## Contributing

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Added some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

## Suggestions for Contributions

* How the F do you test this thing?
* Can Rails instruments be detected at initialization time to register all probes at once?
* The Subscriber turns the Notification payload (a hash) into a string.
  This can surely be better.

## License

Copyright (c) 2012 Eric Saxby

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Commit message:

Limit maximum integer that subscriber outputs as time diff
In Rails 3, notifications send start_time and end_time. If the
nanosecond diff of these two values is larger than the maximum value of
a C int, this was throwing an error down in libusdt. As this information
is of questionable value compared with how DTrace can do time
comparisons in Rails 4, we limit this value to the maximum C int.

README.md, after:

# rails-dtrace

The rails-dtrace gem hooks into the ActiveSupport::Notifications
instruments in Rails, turning them into DTrace probes.

## Requirements

Rails > 3.0

An OS that supports DTrace. For example:
* MacOS X
* Illumos
* SmartOS
* Solaris
* BSD
* Oracle Linux ?

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'ruby-usdt', :git => 'https://github.com/chrisa/ruby-usdt.git',
        :submodules => true, :branch => 'disable_provider'
gem 'rails-dtrace'
```

And then execute:

```bash
$ bundle
```

## Warning

This gem in an experiment in progress. The code does not have automated
tests, and the performance impact of ActiveSupport::Notifications
combined with ruby-usdt and libusdt are unknown. **DO NOT USE THIS IN
PRODUCTION** unless you love risk.

Also, this gem requires experimental behavior in libusdt/ruby-usdt.
Core behavior may drastically change between releases/commits of this
gem. When this is no longer the case (and I figure out how to write
tests around this gem) these warnings will disappear.

## Usage

Once you add the gem to your Rails application, it will automatically
subscribe to all notifications, turning them into DTrace probes. 

Note that notifications are lazy-loaded, so even though rails-dtrace subscribes to all available instruments, they will only be converted to probes as they fire in Rails code. For this reason, in order to get a full picture of what is happening in a Rails process, enough load should be generated to ensure that all important probes are registered before tracing.

### Rails 3

Arguments to probes are:

* `arg0` - Unique identifier of notification - String
* `arg1` - Stringified hash of notification payload - String
* `arg2` - Nanoseconds between start and finish of event - Integer

The notification name is turned into the probe function, and the probe name is defined as 'event'. For instance, `sql.active_record` becomes `ruby*:rails:sql.active_record:event`. This is to make events somewhat compatible with the edge Rails method of firing events, described below.

Some operating systems (MacOS X, I'm looking at you) don't give you nanosecond time resolution. In this case you get microseconds multipled by 1000. If the time differential is larger than the maximum value of a C int *(2147483647)*, then that will be output instead.

The following dtrace command can be used, as an example:

```bash
sudo dtrace -n 'ruby*:rails:sql.active_record: { 
  printf(
    "%s \n\t %s \n\t %d", 
    copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg1),
    arg2
  )
}'
```

Example output:

```
  1  15407  sql.active_record:event 4595e4d30b17bdb96fe9 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70184895988280, :binds=>[]} 
	 238000
```


### Rails 4 / Edge Rails

In newer Rails, notifications become more dtrace-like. Rather than a notification sending a message to `#call` (which gets start time and end time), they can send two messages, `#start` and `#finish`. This way, you can do your own math on the notification timing.

In *rails-dtrace*, the notification name becomes the probe function, and we map `start -> entry` and `finish -> exit`.

If a notification subscriber responds to #call, ActiveSupport::Notifications will send methods in the Rails 3 way. For this reason the rails-dtrace code is incompatible at this time. It could conceivably be done with some metaprogramming to trick the Rails framework, but I'd prefer to keep the rails-dtrace code small and readable.

Arguments to probes are:

* `arg0` - Unique identifier of notification - String
* `arg1` - Stringified hash of notification payload - String
* `arg2` - 0 - This is for seamless compatibility with older Rails - Integer

The following dtrace command can be used, as an example:

```bash
sudo dtrace -n 'ruby*:rails:sql.active_record: { 
  printf(
    "%s \n\t %s", 
    copyinstr(arg0),
    copyinstr(arg1)
  )
}'
```

Example output:

```
3  52609  sql.active_record:entry a392841cfd75a132432e 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70362294355260, :binds=>[]}
3  52610  sql.active_record:exit a392841cfd75a132432e 
	 {:sql=>"SELECT \"things\".* FROM \"things\" ", :name=>"Thing Load", :connection_id=>70362294355260, :binds=>[]}
```


## Contributing

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Added some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

## Suggestions for Contributions

* How the F do you test this thing?
* Can Rails instruments be detected at initialization time to register all probes at once?
* The Subscriber turns the Notification payload (a hash) into a string.
  This can surely be better.

## License

Copyright (c) 2012 Eric Saxby

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
